---
title: Shallow Neural Networks 
authors: Satya
---

1D regression is limited. Need for many inputs/outputs and also non-linearity can not be modelled with just straight lines.

Here is a simple 1D model (represented in the equation form): 

$$
y = f[x, \phi] = \phi_0 + \phi_1 x
$$

We have two "parameters". Slope $\phi_1$ and intercept on y-axis $\phi_0$.

This shallow network, on the other hand, has 10 parameters with just 1 input and 1 output:

$$
y = f[x, \phi]
= \phi_0
+ \phi_1\, a[\theta_{10} + \theta_{11} x]
+ \phi_2\, a[\theta_{20} + \theta_{21} x]
+ \phi_3\, a[\theta_{30} + \theta_{31} x]
$$

> Shallow neural networks are functions (family of functions, technically) which uses a combination of other functions.

Notice, the activation function − $a\ [.]$, which was applied three times. Most common activation function is rectified linear unit or more commonly called ReLU:

$$
a[z] = \mathrm{ReLU}[z] =
\begin{cases}
0, & z < 0 \\
z, & z \ge 0
\end{cases}
$$

For positive values, it just returns the input as the output. For negative values of inputs it clips to 0. 

<iframe 
    src="/static/ml-dl/relu.html" 
    sandbox="allow-scripts allow-same-origin"
    style="border: none; display: block; margin: auto; width: 70%; height: 320px;">
</iframe>

The set of a parameters in a small neural network can be given by:

$$
\mathbf{\phi} = \{\phi_0, \phi_1, \phi_2, \phi_3, \theta_{10}, \theta_{11}, \theta_{20}, \theta_{21}, \theta_{30}, \theta_{31}\}
$$

The moment we these parameters, they can have different values and hence we are reminded that:

> Neural networks are family of equations.

Once these values are "settled" by the process of learning, we can start producing outputs (recall that this is called inference). 

For a training dataset, $\{\mathbf{x}_i, \mathbf{y}_i\}_{i=1}^I$, as well as a loss function, $L[\boldsymbol{\phi}]$, we can begin training to learn these 10 parameters.

The output function will be a piecewise linear function with three joints:

<iframe 
    src="/static/ml-dl/piece.html" 
    sandbox="allow-scripts allow-same-origin"
    style="border: none; display: block; margin: auto; width: 70%; height: 320px;">
</iframe>

We have three linear functions, which get eaten up an activation function:

$$
h_1 = \text{a}[\theta_{10} + \theta_{11}x] \\
h_2 = \text{a}[\theta_{20} + \theta_{21}x] \\
h_3 = \text{a}[\theta_{30} + \theta_{31}x] \\
$$

Outputs of activation functions are hidden units. This gives a rather simpler form of the equation of a simple neural network:

$$
y = \phi_0
+ \phi_1\, h1
+ \phi_2\, h2
+ \phi_3\, h3 
$$

